# GIS-5571---Final-Project

### Paper
The rapid spread of invasive carp species in waterways throughout the Midwest has caused millions of dollars’ worth of damage to fisheries and other ecosystem services provided by native species. Estimating the populations of invasive species informs models for their distribution which can then be used in management decisions. The risks to ecosystem services and ecology can be mitigated based on these predictions. This project aims to develop a model for estimating the distribution of Asian (Bighead, Black, Silver, and Grass) carp species in the Mississippi River Basin using data accessed with an ETL methodology. The workflow for this process will use arcpy in an ArcGIS Pro Notebook to streamline data retrieval and processing. The assessment will use precipitation, salinity, and water feature information to create a presence-only prediction. The basis for the prediction will be carp point data from 2011 to 2018 in the study area sourced from the USGS.

### Project Code
Initially, this project focused on accessing data from five different online data repositories. The point locations for Asian carp were retrieved as a point layer on ArcGIS Online from a larger shapefile of all fish species. This data was added manually in ArcGIS Pro to the analysis map and was referenced using the layer name in later analysis. For the rest of the data, access urls retrieved using web inspector, the requests module will all accessing and writing the content to files. The salinity and water features data required headers to determine there was a user accessing the data. With the OS module, a new folder was created to act as the working directory and to store the data zipfiles and CSVs. The data was then stored using the csv and zipfile modules.

The salinity csv data included global historical data for nearly forty years and needed to be processed before use in the analysis. The first step in this process was to use the “copy rows” tool to generate OIDs for each sample location. Once this was complete, the “table to table” tool allowed querying in the new table. The query was set up as follows: County is equal to USA, date is on or after 1/1/2018, and date is on or before 6/1/2018. This reduced the number of redundancies in the data as well as make the table small enough to apply the “convert XY Table to Points” process for the remaining 84,000 observations.

With all data added to the map, each shapefile was clipped to the Mississippi River Basin boundary. The precipitation raster was masked using “extract by mask”. The salinity data points were interpolated with Kriging using the ordinary method and the spherical semi-variogram model. The output cell size was set to .07. The rivers shapefile was then converted to raster using “polyline to raster” with scale ranks as the value field, output cell size of .1, and maximum length as the cell assignment type.

The “Presence-Only Prediction (Max-Ent)” tool was used with the Asian carp point data as the input point features. The interpolated salinity raster, precipitation raster, and river raster served as the explanatory training rasters. The explanatory variable expansion was the squared (quadratic) version and the study area was determined using the convex hull method. Without input background points, the tool generated these points as a part of the analysis process.

### Presentation
Slides for a presentation given on Wednesday, Dec 14, 2022.
